The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Murder on the Links, by Agatha Christie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Murder on the Links

Author: Agatha Christie

Release Date: February 11, 2019 [EBook #58866]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURDER ON THE LINKS ***




Produced by Alex Cabal for the Standard Ebooks project,
with thanks to Mark Graham of the Internet Archive





THE MURDER ON THE LINKS

By Agatha Christie




TO MY HUSBAND

A fellow enthusiast for detective stories, and to whom I am indebted
for much helpful advice and criticism.




CONTENTS

1: A Fellow Traveller

2: An Appeal for Help

3: At the Villa Geneviève

4: The Letter Signed "Bella"

5: Mrs. Renauld's Story

6: The Scene of the Crime

7: The Mysterious Madame Daubreuil

8: An Unexpected Meeting

9: M. Giraud Finds Some Clues

10: Gabriel Stonor

11: Jack Renauld

12: Poirot Elucidates Certain Points

13: The Girl with the Anxious Eyes

14: The Second Body

15: A Photograph

16: The Beroldy Case

17: We Make Further Investigations

18: Giraud Acts

19: I Use My Grey Cells

20: An Amazing Statement

21: Hercule Poirot on the Case!

22: I Find Love

23: Difficulties Ahead

24: "Save Him!"

25: An Unexpected Dénouement

26: I Receive a Letter

27: Jack Renauld's Story

28: Journey's End




1

A Fellow Traveller


I believe that a well-known anecdote exists to the effect that
a young writer, determined to make the commencement of his story
forcible and original enough to catch and rivet the attention of
the most blasé of editors, penned the following sentence:

"'Hell!' said the Duchess."

Strangely enough, this tale of mine opens in much the same
fashion. Only the lady who gave utterance to the exclamation was
not a Duchess!

It was a day in early June. I had been transacting some business in
Paris and was returning by the morning service to London where I was
still sharing rooms with my old friend, the Belgian ex-detective,
Hercule Poirot.

The Calais express was singularly empty--in fact, my own compartment
held only one other traveller. I had made a somewhat hurried
departure from the hotel and was busy assuring myself that I had
duly collected all my traps when the train started. Up till then I
had hardly noticed my companion, but I was now violently recalled
to the fact of her existence. Jumping up from her seat, she let
down the window and stuck her head out, withdrawing it a moment
later with the brief and forcible ejaculation "Hell!"

Now I am old-fashioned. A woman, I consider, should be womanly. I have
no patience with the modern neurotic girl who jazzes from morning
to night, smokes like a chimney, and uses language which would make
a Billingsgate fishwoman blush!

I looked up now, frowning slightly, into a pretty, impudent face,
surmounted by a rakish little red hat. A thick cluster of black curls
hid each ear. I judged that she was little more than seventeen,
but her face was covered with powder, and her lips were quite
impossibly scarlet.

Nothing abashed, she returned my glance, and executed an expressive
grimace.

"Dear me, we've shocked the kind gentleman!" she observed to an
imaginary audience. "I apologize for my language! Most unladylike,
and all that, but Oh, Lord, there's reason enough for it! Do you
know I've lost my only sister?"

"Really?" I said politely. "How unfortunate."

"He disapproves!" remarked the lady. "He disapproves utterly--of me,
and my sister--which last is unfair, because he hasn't seen her!"

I opened my mouth, but she forestalled me.

"Say no more! Nobody loves me! I shall go into the garden and eat
worms! Boohoo! I am crushed!"

She buried herself behind a large comic French paper.  In a minute
or two I saw her eyes stealthily peeping at me over the top. In
spite of myself I could not help smiling, and in a minute she had
tossed the paper aside, and had burst into a merry peal of laughter.

"I knew you weren't such a mutt as you looked," she cried.

Her laughter was so infectious that I could not help joining in,
though I hardly cared for the word "mutt."  The girl was certainly
all that I most disliked, but that was no reason why I should make
myself ridiculous by my attitude. I prepared to unbend. After all,
she was decidedly pretty. . . .

"There! Now we're friends!" declared the minx.  "Say you're sorry
about my sister--"

"I am desolated!"

"That's a good boy!"

"Let me finish. I was going to add that, although I am desolated,
I can manage to put up with her absence very well." I made a
little bow.

But this most unaccountable of damsels frowned and shook her head.

"Cut it out. I prefer the 'dignified disapproval' stunt.  Oh, your
face! 'Not one of us,' it said. And you were right there--though,
mind you, it's pretty hard to tell nowadays. It's not every one who
can distinguish between a demi and a duchess. There now, I believe
I've shocked you again! You've been dug out of the backwoods, you
have. Not that I mind that. We could do with a few more of your
sort. I just hate a fellow who gets fresh. It makes me mad."

She shook her head vigorously.

"What are you like when you're mad?" I inquired with a smile.

"A regular little devil! Don't care what I say, or what I do,
either! I nearly did a chap in once. Yes, really.  He'd have
deserved it too. Italian blood I've got. I shall get into trouble
one of these days."

"Well," I begged, "don't get mad with me."

"I shan't. I like you--did the first moment I set eyes on you. But
you looked so disapproving that I never thought we should make
friends."

"Well, we have. Tell me something about yourself."

"I'm an actress. No--not the kind you're thinking of, lunching at
the Savoy covered with jewellery, and with their photograph in every
paper saying how much they love Madame So and So's face cream. I've
been on the boards since I was a kid of six--tumbling."

"I beg your pardon," I said puzzled.

"Haven't you seen child acrobats?"

"Oh, I understand."

"I'm American born, but I've spent most of my life in England. We
got a new show now--"

"We?"

"My sister and I. Sort of song and dance, and a bit of patter,
and a dash of the old business thrown in. It's quite a new idea,
and it hits them every time. There's to be money in it--"

My new acquaintance leaned forward, and discoursed volubly, a great
many of her terms being quite unintelligible to me. Yet I found
myself evincing an increasing interest in her. She seemed such a
curious mixture of child and woman. Though perfectly worldly-wise,
and able, as she expressed it, to take care of herself, there was yet
something curiously ingenuous in her single-minded attitude towards
life, and her whole-hearted determination to "make good." This
glimpse of a world unknown to me was not without its charm, and I
enjoyed seeing her vivid little face light up as she talked.

We passed through Amiens. The name awakened many memories. My
companion seemed to have an intuitive knowledge of what was in
my mind.

"Thinking of the War?"

I nodded.

"You were through it, I suppose?"

"Pretty well. I was wounded once, and after the Somme they invalided
me out altogether. I had a half fledged Army job for a bit. I'm a
sort of private secretary now to an M. P."

"My! That's brainy!"

"No, it isn't. There's really awfully little to do.  Usually a couple
of hours every day sees me through.  It's dull work too. In fact,
I don't know what I should do if I hadn't got something to fall
back upon."

"Don't say you collect bugs!"

"No. I share rooms with a very interesting man. He's a Belgian--an
ex-detective. He's set up as a private detective in London, and he's
doing extraordinarily well.  He's really a very marvellous little
man. Time and again he has proved to be right where the official
police have failed."

My companion listened with widening eyes.

"Isn't that interesting, now? I just adore crime. I go to all the
mysteries on the movies. And when there's a murder on I just devour
the papers."

"Do you remember the Styles Case?" I asked.

"Let me see, was that the old lady who was poisoned?  Somewhere down
in Essex?"

I nodded.

"That was Poirot's first big case. Undoubtedly, but for him, the
murderer would have escaped scot-free. It was a most wonderful bit
of detective work."

Warming to my subject, I ran over the heads of the affair, working
up to the triumphant and unexpected denouement. The girl listened
spellbound. In fact, we were so absorbed that the train drew into
Calais station before we realized it.

"My goodness gracious me!" cried my companion.  "Where's my
powder-puff?"

She proceeded to bedaub her face liberally, and then applied a stick
of lip salve to her lips, observing the effect in a small pocket
glass, and betraying not the faintest sign of self-consciousness.

"I say," I hesitated. "I dare say it's cheek on my part, but why
do all that sort of thing?"

The girl paused in her operations, and stared at me with undisguised
surprise.

"It isn't as though you weren't so pretty that you can afford to
do without it," I said stammeringly.

"My dear boy! I've got to do it. All the girls do.  Think I want
to look like a little frump up from the country?" She took one last
look in the mirror, smiled approval, and put it and her vanity-box
away in her bag.  "That's better. Keeping up appearances is a bit
of a fag, I grant, but if a girl respects herself it's up to her
not to let herself get slack."

To this essentially moral sentiment, I had no reply. A point of
view makes a great difference.

I secured a couple of porters, and we alighted on the platform. My
companion held out her hand.

"Good-bye, and I'll mind my language better in future."

"Oh, but surely you'll let me look after you on the boat?"

"Mayn't be on the boat. I've got to see whether that sister of mine
got aboard after all anywhere. But thanks all the same."

"Oh, but we're going to meet again, surely? I--" I hesitated. "I
want to meet your sister."

We both laughed.

"That's real nice of you. I'll tell her what you say.  But I
don't fancy we'll meet again. You've been very good to me on the
journey, especially after I cheeked you as I did. But what your
face expressed first thing is quite true. I'm not your kind. And
that brings trouble--_I_ know that well enough. . . ."

Her face changed. For the moment all the light-hearted gaiety died
out of it. It looked angry--revengeful. . . .

"So good-bye," she finished, in a lighter tone.

"Aren't you even going to tell me your name?" I cried, as she
turned away.

She looked over her shoulder. A dimple appeared in each cheek. She
was like a lovely picture by Greuze.

"Cinderella," she said, and laughed.

But little did I think when and how I should see Cinderella again.




2

An Appeal for Help


It was five minutes past nine when I entered our joint sitting-room
for breakfast on the following morning.

My friend Poirot, exact to the minute as usual, was just tapping
the shell of his second egg.

He beamed upon me as I entered.

"You have slept well, yes? You have recovered from the
crossing so terrible? It is a marvel, almost you are exact this
morning. _Pardon_, but your tie is not symmetrical.  Permit that
I rearrange him."

Elsewhere, I have described Hercule Poirot. An extraordinary little
man! Height, five feet four inches, egg-shaped head carried a
little to one side, eyes that shone green when he was excited,
stiff military moustache, air of dignity immense! He was neat
and dandified in appearance. For neatness of any kind, he had an
absolute passion. To see an ornament set crooked, or a speck of dust,
or a slight disarray in one's attire, was torture to the little man
until he could ease his feelings by remedying the matter. "Order"
and "Method" were his gods. He had a certain disdain for tangible
evidence, such as footprints and cigarette ash, and would maintain
that, taken by themselves, they would never enable a detective to
solve a problem. Then he would tap his egg-shaped head with absurd
complacency, and remark with great satisfaction: "The true work,
it is done from _within_. _The little grey cells_--remember always
the little grey cells, _mon ami_!"

I slipped into my seat, and remarked idly, in answer to Poirot's
greeting, that an hour's sea passage from Calais to Dover could
hardly be dignified by the epithet "terrible."

Poirot waved his egg-spoon in vigorous refutation of my remark.

"_Du tout!_ If for an hour one experiences sensations and emotions
of the most terrible, one has lived many hours! Does not one of
your English poets say that time is counted, not by hours, but
by heart-beats?"

"I fancy Browning was referring to something more romantic than
sea sickness, though."

"Because he was an Englishman, an Islander to whom _la Manche_ was
nothing. Oh, you English! With _nous autres_ it is different. Figure
to yourself that a lady of my acquaintance at the beginning of
the war fled to Ostend. There she had a terrible crisis of the
nerves. Impossible to escape further except by crossing the sea!
And she had a horror--_mais une horreur!_--of the sea!  What was she
to do? Daily _les Boches_ were drawing nearer. Imagine to yourself
the terrible situation!"

"What did she do?" I inquired curiously.

"Fortunately her husband was _homme pratique_. He was also very calm,
the crises of the nerves, they affected him not. _Il l'a emportée
simplement!_ Naturally when she reached England she was prostrate,
but she still breathed."

Poirot shook his head seriously. I composed my face as best I could.

Suddenly he stiffened and pointed a dramatic finger at the toast
rack.

"Ah, par exemple, c'est trop fort!" he cried.

"What is it?"

"This piece of toast. You remark him not?" He whipped the offender
out of the rack, and held it up for me to examine.

"Is it square? No. Is it a triangle? Again no. Is it even
round? No. Is it of any shape remotely pleasing to the eye? What
symmetry have we here? None."

"It's cut from a cottage loaf," I explained soothingly.

Poirot threw me a withering glance.

"What an intelligence has my friend Hastings!" he exclaimed
sarcastically. "Comprehend you not that I have forbidden such a
loaf--a loaf haphazard and shapeless, that no baker should permit
himself to bake!"

I endeavoured to distract his mind.

"Anything interesting come by the post?"

Poirot shook his head with a dissatisfied air.

"I have not yet examined my letters, but nothing of interest
arrives nowadays. The great criminals, the criminals of method,
they do not exist. The cases I have been employed upon lately were
_banal_ to the last degree. In verity I am reduced to recovering
lost lap-dogs for fashionable ladies! The last problem that presented
any interest was that intricate little affair of the Yardly diamond,
and that was--how many months ago, my friend?"

He shook his head despondently, and I roared with laughter.

"Cheer up, Poirot, the luck will change. Open your letters. For
all you know, there may be a great Case looming on the horizon."

Poirot smiled, and taking up the neat little letter opener with
which he opened his correspondence he slit the tops of the several
envelopes that lay by his plate.

"A bill. Another bill. It is that I grow extravagant in my old
age. Aha! a note from Japp."

"Yes?" pricked up my ears. The Scotland Yard Inspector had more
than once introduced us to an interesting case.

"He merely thanks me (in his fashion) for a little point in the
Aberystwyth Case on which I was able to set him right. I am delighted
to have been of service to him."

"How does he thank you?" I asked curiously, for I knew my Japp.

"He is kind enough to say that I am a wonderful sport for my age,
and that he was glad to have had the chance of letting me in on
the case."

This was so typical of Japp, that I could not forbear a
chuckle. Poirot continued to read his correspondence placidly.

"A suggestion that I should give a lecture to our local boy
scouts. The Countess of Forfanock will be obliged if I will call and
see her. Another lap-dog without doubt! And now for the last. Ah--"

I looked up, quick to notice the change of tone. Poirot was reading
attentively. In a minute he tossed the sheet over to me.

"This is out of the ordinary, _mon ami_. Read for yourself."

The letter was written on a foreign type of paper, in a bold
characteristic hand:

"Villa Geneviève

Merlinville-sur-Mer

France

"DEAR SIR,

"I am in need of the services of a detective and, for reasons
which I will give you later, do not wish to call in the official
police. I have heard of you from several quarters, and all reports
go to show that you are not only a man of decided ability, but one
who also knows how to be discreet. I do not wish to trust details
to the post, but, on account of a secret I possess, I go in daily
fear of my life. I am convinced that the danger is imminent, and
therefore I beg that you will lose no time in crossing to France. I
will send a car to meet you at Calais, if you will wire me when
you are arriving. I shall be obliged if you will drop all cases
you have on hand, and devote yourself solely to my interests. I
am prepared to pay any compensation necessary. I shall probably
need your services for a considerable period of time, as it may
be necessary for you to go out to Santiago, where I spent several
years of my life. I shall be content for you to name your own fee.

"Assuring you once more that the matter is _urgent_,

"Yours faithfully

"P. T. RENAULD."

Below the signature was a hastily scrawled line, almost illegible:
"For God's sake, come!"

I handed the letter back with quickened pulses.

"At last!" I said. "Here is something distinctly out of the
ordinary."

"Yes, indeed," said Poirot meditatively.

"You will go of course," I continued.

Poirot nodded. He was thinking deeply. Finally he seemed to make
up his mind, and glanced up at the clock. His face was very grave.

"See you, my friend, there is no time to lose. The Continental
express leaves Victoria at 11 o'clock. Do not agitate yourself. There
is plenty of time. We can allow ten minutes for discussion. You
accompany me, _n'est-ce pas_?"

"Well--"

"You told me yourself that your employer needed you not for the
next few weeks."

"Oh, that's all right. But this Mr. Renauld hints strongly that
his business is private."

"Ta-ta-ta. I will manage M. Renauld. By the way, I seem to know
the name?"

"There's a well-known South American millionaire fellow. His name's
Renauld. I don't know whether it could be the same."

"But without doubt. That explains the mention of Santiago. Santiago
is in Chile, and Chile it is in South America! Ah, but we progress
finely."

"Dear me, Poirot," I said, my excitement rising, "I smell some
goodly shekels in this. If we succeed, we shall make our fortunes!"

"Do not be too sure of that, my friend. A rich man and his money
are not so easily parted. Me, I have seen a well-known millionaire
turn out a tramful of people to seek for a dropped halfpenny."

I acknowledged the wisdom of this.

"In any case," continued Poirot, "it is not the money which attracts
me here. Certainly it will be pleasant to have _carte blanche_ in
our investigations; one can be sure that way of wasting no time,
but it is something a little bizarre in this problem which arouses
my interest. You remarked the postscript? How did it strike you?"

I considered.

"Clearly he wrote the letter keeping himself well in hand, but at
the end his self-control snapped and, on the impulse of the moment,
he scrawled those four desperate words."

But my friend shook his head energetically.

"You are in error. See you not that while the ink of the signature
is nearly black, that of the postscript is quite pale?"

"Well?" I said puzzled.

"_Mon Dieu, mon ami_, but use your little grey cells! Is it
not obvious? M. Renauld wrote his letter. Without blotting it,
he reread it carefully. Then, not on impulse, but deliberately,
he added those last words, and blotted the sheet."

"But why?"

"_Parbleu!_ so that it should produce the effect upon me that it
has upon you."

"What?"

"_Mais, oui_--to make sure of my coming! He reread the letter and
was dissatisfied. It was not strong enough!"

He paused, and then added softly, his eyes shining with that green
light that always betokened inward excitement: "And so, _mon ami_,
since that postscript was added, not on impulse, but soberly, in
cold blood, the urgency is very great, and we must reach him as
soon as possible."

"Merlinville," I murmured thoughtfully. "I've heard of it, I think."

Poirot nodded.

"It is a quiet little place--but chic! It lies about midway between
Bolougne and Calais. It is rapidly becoming the fashion. Rich
English people who wish to be quiet are taking it up. M. Renauld
has a house in England, I suppose?"

"Yes, in Rutland Gate, as far as I remember. Also a big place in
the country, somewhere in Hertfordshire.  But I really know very
little about him, he doesn't do much in a social way. I believe he
has large South American interests in the City, and has spent most
of his life out in Chile and the Argentino."

"Well, we shall hear all details from the man himself.  Come,
let us pack. A small suit-case each, and then a taxi to Victoria."

"And the Countess?" I inquired with a smile.

"Ah! _je m'en fiche!_ Her case was certainly not interesting."

"Why so sure of that?"

"Because in that case she would have come, not written. A woman
cannot wait--always remember that, Hastings."

Eleven o'clock saw our departure from Victoria on our way
to Dover. Before starting Poirot had despatched a telegram to
Mr. Renauld giving the time of our arrival at Calais.  "I'm surprised
you haven't invested in a few bottles of some sea sick remedy,
Poirot," I observed maliciously, as I recalled our conversation
at breakfast.

My friend, who was anxiously scanning the weather, turned a
reproachful face upon me.

"Is it that you have forgotten the method most excellent of
Laverguier? His system, I practise it always. One balances oneself,
if you remember, turning the head from left to right, breathing in
and out, counting six between each breath."

"H'm," I demurred. "You'll be rather tired of balancing yourself
and counting six by the time you get to Santiago, or Buenos Ayres,
or wherever it is you land."

"_Quelle idée!_ You do not figure to yourself that I shall go
to Santiago?"

"Mr. Renauld suggests it in his letter."

"He did not know the methods of Hercule Poirot. I do not run to
and fro, making journeys, and agitating myself. My work is done
from within--_here_--" he tapped his forehead significantly.

As usual, this remark roused my argumentative faculty.

"It's all very well, Poirot, but I think you are falling into the
habit of despising certain things too much. A finger-print has led
sometimes to the arrest and conviction of a murderer."

"And has, without doubt, hanged more than one innocent man,"
remarked Poirot dryly.

"But surely the study of finger-prints and footprints, cigarette
ash, different kinds of mud, and other clues that comprise the
minute observation of details--all these are of vital importance?"

"But certainly. I have never said otherwise. The trained observer,
the expert, without doubt he is useful!  But the others, the Hercules
Poirots, they are above the experts! To them the experts bring
the facts, their business is the method of the crime, its logical
deduction, the proper sequence and order of the facts; above all,
the true psychology of the case. You have hunted the fox, yes?"

"I have hunted a bit, now and again," I said, rather bewildered by
this abrupt change of subject. "Why?"

"_Eh bien_, this hunting of the fox, you need the dogs, no?"

"Hounds," I corrected gently. "Yes, of course."

"But yet," Poirot wagged his finger at me. "You did not descend
from your horse and run along the ground smelling with your nose
and uttering loud Ow Ows?"

In spite of myself I laughed immoderately. Poirot nodded in a
satisfied manner.

"So. You leave the work of the d----- hounds to the hounds. Yet you
demand that I, Hercule Poirot, should make myself ridiculous by
lying down (possibly on damp grass) to study hypothetical footprints,
and should scoop up cigarette ash when I do not know one kind from
the other. Remember the Plymouth Express mystery. The good Japp
departed to make a survey of the railway line. When he returned,
I, without having moved from my apartments, was able to tell him
exactly what he had found."

"So you are of the opinion that Japp wasted his time."

"Not at all, since his evidence confirmed my theory.  But _I_
should have wasted my time if _I_ had gone. It is the same
with so called 'experts.' Remember the handwriting testimony
in the Cavendish Case. One counsel's questioning brings out
testimony as to the resemblances, the defence brings evidence to
show dissimilarity. All the language is very technical. And the
result? What we all knew in the first place. The writing was very
like that of John Cavendish. And the psychological mind is faced
with the question 'Why?' Because it was actually his?  Or because
some one wished us to think it was his? I answered that question,
_mon ami_, and answered it correctly."

And Poirot, having effectually silenced, if not convinced me,
leaned back with a satisfied air.

On the boat, I knew better than to disturb my friend's solitude. The
weather was gorgeous, and the sea as smooth as the proverbial
mill-pond, so I was hardly surprised to hear that Laverguier's
method had once more justified itself when a smiling Poirot joined
me on disembarking at Calais. A disappointment was in store for us,
as no car had been sent to meet us, but Poirot put this down to
his telegram having been delayed in transit.

"Since it is _carte blanche_, we will hire a car," he said
cheerfully. And a few minutes later saw us creaking and jolting
along, in the most ramshackle of automobiles that ever plied for
hire, in the direction of Merlinville.

My spirits were at their highest.

"What gorgeous air!" I exclaimed. "This promises to be a delightful
trip."

"For you, yes. For me, I have work to do, remember, at our journey's
end."

"Bah!" I said cheerfully. "You will discover all, ensure this
Mr. Renauld's safety, run the would-be assassins to earth, and all
will finish in a blaze of glory."

"You are sanguine, my friend."

"Yes, I feel absolutely assured of success. Are you not the one
and only Hercule Poirot?"

But my little friend did not rise to the bait. He was observing
me gravely.

"You are what the Scotch people call 'fey,' Hastings.  It presages
disaster."

"Nonsense. At any rate, you do not share my feelings."

"No, but I am afraid."

"Afraid of what?"

"I do not know. But I have a premonition--a _je ne sais quoi_!"

He spoke so gravely, that I was impressed in spite of myself.

"I have a feeling," he said slowly, "that this is going to be a
big affair--a long, troublesome problem that will not be easy to
work out."

I would have questioned him further, but we were just coming into
the little town of Merlinville, and we slowed up to inquire the
way to the Villa Geneviève.

"Straight on, monsieur, through the town. The Villa Geneviève is
about half a mile the other side. You cannot miss it. A big Villa,
overlooking the sea."

We thanked our informant, and drove on, leaving the town behind. A
fork in the road brought us to a second halt. A peasant was trudging
towards us, and we waited for him to come up to us in order to ask
the way again.  There was a tiny Villa standing right by the road,
but it was too small and dilapidated to be the one we wanted.
As we waited, the gate of it swung open and a girl came out.

The peasant was passing us now, and the driver leaned forward from
his seat and asked for direction.

"The Villa Geneviève? Just a few steps up this road to the right,
monsieur. You could see it if it were not for the curve."

The chauffeur thanked him, and started the car again. My eyes were
fascinated by the girl who still stood, with one hand on the gate,
watching us. I am an admirer of beauty, and here was one whom nobody
could have passed without remark. Very tall, with the proportions of
a young goddess, her uncovered golden head gleaming in the sunlight,
I swore to myself that she was one of the most beautiful girls I
had ever seen. As we swung up the rough road, I turned my head to
look after her.

"By Jove, Poirot," I exclaimed, "did you see that young goddess."

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

"_Ça commence!_" he murmured. "Already you have seen a goddess!"

"But, hang it all, wasn't she?"

"Possibly. I did not remark the fact."

"Surely you noticed her?"

"_Mon ami_, two people rarely see the same thing.  You, for instance,
saw a goddess. I--" he hesitated.

"Yes?"

"I saw only a girl with anxious eyes," said Poirot gravely.

But at that moment we drew up at a big green gate, and,
simultaneously, we both uttered an exclamation.  Before it stood
an imposing _sergent de ville_. He held up his hand to bar our way.

"You cannot pass, monsieurs."

"But we wish to see Mr. Renauld," I cried. "We have an
appointment. This is his Villa, isn't it?"

"Yes, monsieur, but--"

Poirot leaned forward.

"But what?"

"M. Renauld was murdered this morning."




3

At the Villa Geneviève


In a moment Poirot had leapt from the car, his eyes blazing with
excitement. He caught the man by the shoulder.

"What is that you say? Murdered? When? How?"

The _sergent de ville_ drew himself up.

"I cannot answer any questions, monsieur."

"True. I comprehend." Poirot reflected for a minute.  "The Commissary
of Police, he is without doubt within?"

"Yes, monsieur."

Poirot took out a card, and scribbled a few words on it.

"_Voilà!_ Will you have the goodness to see that this card is sent
in to the commissary at once?"

The man took it and, turning his head over his shoulder,
whistled. In a few seconds a comrade joined him and was handed
Poirot's message. There was a wait of some minutes, and then a
short stout man with a huge moustache came bustling down to the
gate. The _sergent de ville_ saluted and stood aside.

"My dear M. Poirot," cried the new-comer, "I am delighted to see
you. Your arrival is most opportune."

Poirot's face had lighted up.

"M. Bex! This is indeed a pleasure." He turned to me. "This is an
English friend of mine, Captain Hastings--M. Lucien Bex."

The commissary and I bowed to each other ceremoniously, then M. Bex
turned once more to Poirot.

"_Mon vieux_, I have not seen you since 1909, that time in Ostend. I
heard that you had left the Force?"

"So I have. I run a private business in London."

"And you say you have information to give which may assist us?"

"Possibly you know it already. You were aware that I had been
sent for?"

"No. By whom?"

"The dead man. It seems he knew an attempt was going to be made on
his life. Unfortunately he sent for me too late."

"_Sacri tonnerre!_" ejaculated the Frenchman. "So he foresaw his
own murder? That upsets our theories considerably!  But come inside."

He held the gate open, and we commenced walking towards the
house. M. Bex continued to talk:

"The examining magistrate, M. Hautet, must hear of this at once. He
has just finished examining the scene of the crime and is about to
begin his interrogations. A charming man. You will like him. Most
sympathetic.  Original in his methods, but an excellent judge."

"When was the crime committed?" asked Poirot.

"The body was discovered this morning about nine o'clock. Madame
Renauld's evidence, and that of the doctors goes to show that the
death must have occurred about 2 a.m. But enter, I pray of you."

We had arrived at the steps which led up to the front door of the
Villa. In the hall another _sergent de ville_ was sitting. He rose
at sight of the commissary.

"Where is M. Hautet now?" inquired the latter.

"In the _salon_, monsieur."

M. Bex opened a door to the left of the hall, and we passed
in. M. Hautet and his clerk were sitting at a big round table. They
looked up as we entered. The commissary introduced us, and explained
our presence.

M. Hautet, the Juge d'Instruction, was a tall, gaunt man, with
piercing dark eyes, and a neatly cut grey beard, which he had a
habit of caressing as he talked.  Standing by the mantelpiece was
an elderly man, with slightly stooping shoulders, who was introduced
to us as Dr. Durand.

"Most extraordinary," remarked M. Hautet, as the commissary finished
speaking. "You have the letter here, monsieur?"

Poirot handed it to him, and the magistrate read it.

"H'm. He speaks of a secret. What a pity he was not more explicit. We
are much indebted to you, M. Poirot.  I hope you will do us the
honour of assisting us in our investigations. Or are you obliged
to return to London?"

"M. le juge, I propose to remain. I did not arrive in time to
prevent my client's death, but I feel myself bound in honour to
discover the assassin."

The magistrate bowed.

"These sentiments do you honour. Also, without doubt, Madame Renauld
will wish to retain your services.  We are expecting M. Giraud from
the Sûreté in Paris any moment, and I am sure that you and he will
be able to give each other mutual assistance in your investigations.
In the meantime, I hope that you will do me the honour to be present
at my interrogations, and I need hardly say that if there is any
assistance you require it is at your disposal."

"I thank you, monsieur. You will comprehend that at present I am
completely in the dark. I know nothing whatever."

M. Hautet nodded to the commissary, and the latter took up the tale:

"This morning, the old servant Françoise, on descending to start
her work, found the front door ajar. Feeling a momentary alarm as to
burglars, she looked into the dining-room, but seeing the silver was
safe she thought no more about it, concluding that her master had,
without doubt, risen early, and gone for a stroll."

"Pardon, monsieur, for interrupting, but was that a common practice
of his?"

"No, it was not, but old Françoise has the common idea as
regards the English--that they are mad, and liable to do the most
unaccountable things at any moment!  Going to call her mistress
as usual, a younger maid, Léonie, was horrified to discover her
gagged and bound, and almost at the same moment news was brought
that M. Renauld's body had been discovered, stone dead, stabbed in
the back."

"Where?"

"That is one of the most extraordinary features of the
case. M. Poirot, the body was lying, face downwards, _in an open
grave_."

"What?"

"Yes. The pit was freshly dug--just a few yards outside the boundary
of the Villa grounds."

"And he had been dead--how long?"

Dr. Durand answered this.

"I examined the body this morning at ten o'clock.  Death must have
taken place at least seven, and possibly ten hours previously."

"H'm, that fixes it at between midnight and 3 a.m."

"Exactly, and Madame Renauld's evidence places it at after 2
a.m. which narrows the field still further.  Death must have been
instantaneous, and naturally could not have been self-inflicted."

Poirot nodded, and the commissary resumed:

"Madame Renauld was hastily freed from the cords that bound her by
the horrified servants. She was in a terrible condition of weakness,
almost unconscious from the pain of her bonds. It appears that
two masked men entered the bedroom, gagged and bound her, whilst
forcibly abducting her husband. This we know at second hand from
the servants. On hearing the tragic news, she fell at once into an
alarming state of agitation. On arrival, Dr. Durand immediately
prescribed a sedative, and we have not yet been able to question
her. But without doubt she will awake more calm, and be equal to
bearing the strain of the interrogation."

The commissary paused.

"And the inmates of the house, monsieur?"

"There is old Françoise, the housekeeper, she lived for many years
with the former owners of the Villa Geneviève. Then there are two
young girls, sisters, Denise and Léonie Oulard. Their home is in
Merlinville, and they come of the most respectable parents. Then
there is the chauffeur whom M. Renauld brought over from England with
him, but he is away on a holiday.  Finally there are Madame Renauld
and her son, M. Jack Renauld. He, too, is away from home at present."

Poirot bowed his head. M. Hautet spoke:

"Marchaud!"

The _sergent de ville_ appeared.

"Bring in the woman Françoise."

The man saluted, and disappeared. In a moment or two, he returned,
escorting the frightened Françoise.

"You name is Françoise Arrichet?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"You have been a long time in service at the Villa Geneviève?"

"Eleven years with Madame la Vicomtesse. Then when she sold the Villa
this spring, I consented to remain on with the English milor. Never
did I imagine--"

The magistrate cut her short.

"Without doubt, without doubt. Now, Françoise, in this matter of
the front door, whose business was it to fasten it at night?"

"Mine, monsieur. Always I saw to it myself."

"And last night?"

"I fastened it as usual."

"You are sure of that?"

"I swear it by the blessed saints, monsieur."

"What time would that be?"

"The same time as usual, half-past ten, monsieur."

"What about the rest of the household, had they gone up to bed?"

"Madame had retired some time before. Denise and Léonie went up
with me. Monsieur was still in his study."

"Then, if any one unfastened the door afterwards, it must have been
M. Renauld himself?"

Françoise shrugged her broad shoulders.

"What should he do that for? With robbers and assassins passing
every minute! A nice idea! Monsieur was not an imbecile. It is not
as though he had had to let _cette dame_ out--"

The magistrate interrupted sharply:

"_Cette dame?_ What lady do you mean?"

"Why, the lady who came to see him."

"Had a lady been to see him that evening?"

"But yes, monsieur--and many other evenings as well."

"Who was she? Did you know her?"

A rather cunning look spread over the woman's face.  "How should
I know who it was?" she grumbled. "I did not let her in last night."

"Aha!" roared the examining magistrate, bringing his hand down with
a bang on the table. "You would trifle with the police, would you? I
demand that you tell me at once the name of this woman who came to
visit M. Renauld in the evenings."

"The police--the police," grumbled Françoise.  "Never did I think
that I should be mixed up with the police. But I know well enough
who she was. It was Madame Daubreuil."

The commissary uttered an exclamation, and leaned forward as though
in utter astonishment.

"Madame Daubreuil--from the Villa Marguerite just down the road?"

"That is what I said, monsieur. Oh, she is a pretty one,
_cellela_!" The old woman tossed her head scornfully.

"Madame Daubreuil," murmured the commissary.  "Impossible."

"_Voilà_," grumbled Françoise. "That is all you get for telling
the truth."

"Not at all," said the examining magistrate soothingly.  "We were
surprised, that is all. Madame Daubreuil then, and Monsieur Renauld,
they were--" he paused delicately. "Eh? It was that without doubt?"

"How should I know? But what will you? Monsieur, he was _milor
anglais_--_trés riche_--and Madame Daubreuil, she was poor, that
one--and _trés chic_ for all that she lives so quietly with her
daughter. Not a doubt of it, she has had her history! She is no
longer young, but _ma foi!_ I who speak to you have seen the men's
heads turn after her as she goes down the street. Besides lately,
she has had more money to spend--all the town knows it. The little
economies, they are at an end." And Françoise shook her head with
an air of unalterable certainty.

M. Hautet stroked his beard reflectively.

"And Madame Renauld?" he asked at length. "How did she take
this--friendship."

Françoise shrugged her shoulders.

"She was always most amiable--most polite. One would say that
she suspected nothing. But all the same, is it not so, the heart
suffers, monsieur? Day by day, I have watched Madame grow paler and
thinner. She was not the same woman who arrived here a month ago.
Monsieur, too, has changed. He also has had his worries. One could
see that he was on the brink of a crisis of the nerves. And who
could wonder, with an affair conducted such a fashion? No reticence,
no discretion. _Style anglais_, without doubt!"

I bounded indignantly in my seat, but the examining magistrate was
continuing his questions, undistracted by side issues.

"You say that M. Renauld had not to let Madame Daubreuil out? Had
she left, then?"

"Yes, monsieur. I heard them come out of the study and go to the
door. Monsieur said good night, and shut the door after her."

"What time was that?"

"About twenty-five minutes after ten, monsieur."

"Do you know when M. Renauld went to bed?"

"I heard him come up about ten minutes after we did.  The stair
creaks so that one hears every one who goes up and down."

"And that is all? You heard no sound of disturbance during the
night?"

"Nothing whatever, monsieur."

"Which of the servants came down the first in the morning?"

"I did, monsieur. At once I saw the door swinging open."

"What about the other downstairs windows, were they all fastened?"

"Every one of them. There was nothing suspicious or out of place
anywhere."

"Good, Françoise, you can go."

The old woman shuffled towards the door. On the threshold she
looked back.

"I will tell you one thing, monsieur. That Madame Daubreuil she
is a bad one! Oh, yes, one woman knows about another. She is a bad
one, remember that." And, shaking her head sagely, Françoise left
the room.

"Léonie Oulard," called the magistrate.

Léonie appeared dissolved in tears, and inclined to be
hysterical. M. Hautet dealt with her adroitly. Her evidence was
mainly concerned with the discovery of her mistress gagged and
bound, of which she gave rather an exaggerated account. She, like
Françoise, had heard nothing during the night.

Her sister, Denise, succeeded her. She agreed that her master had
changed greatly of late.

"Every day he became more and more morose. He ate less. He was
always depressed." But Denise had her own theory. "Without doubt
it was the Mafia he had on his track! Two masked men--who else
could it be? A terrible society that!"

"It is, of course, possible," said the magistrate smoothly. "Now,
my girl, was it you who admitted Madame Daubreuil to the house
last night?"

"Not _last_ night, monsieur, the night before."

"But Françoise has just told us that Madame Daubreuil was here
last night?"

"No, monsieur. A lady _did_ come to see M. Renauld last night,
but it was not Madame Daubreuil."

Surprised, the magistrate insisted, but the girl held firm. She
knew Madame Daubreuil perfectly by sight.  This lady was dark also,
but shorter, and much younger. Nothing could shake her statement.

"Had you ever seen this lady before?"

"Never, monsieur." And then the girl added diffidently: "But I
think she was English."

"English?"

"Yes, monsieur. She asked for M. Renauld in quite good French,
but the accent--one can always tell it, _n'est-ce pas_? Besides
when they came out of the study they were speaking in English."

"Did you hear what they said? Could you understand it, I mean?"

"Me, I speak the English very well," said Denise with pride. "The
lady was speaking too fast for me to catch what she said, but I
heard Monsieur's last words as he opened the door for her." She
paused, and then repeated carefully and laboriously:

"'Yeas--yeas--butt for Gaud's saike go nauw!'"

"Yes, yes, but for God's sake go now!" repeated the magistrate.

He dismissed Denise and, after a moment or two for consideration,
recalled Françoise. To her he propounded the question as to whether
she had not made a mistake in fixing the night of Madame Daubreuil's
visit.  Françoise, however, proved unexpectedly obstinate. It was
last night that Madame Daubreuil had come. Without a doubt it was
she. Denise wished to make herself interesting, _voilà tout_! So
she had cooked up this fine tale about a strange lady. Airing her
knowledge of English too! Probably Monsieur had never spoken that
sentence in English at all, and even if he had, it proved nothing,
for Madame Daubreuil spoke English perfectly, and generally used
that language when talking to M. and Madame Renauld. "You see,
M. Jack, the son of Monsieur, was usually here, and he spoke the
French very badly."

The magistrate did not insist. Instead he inquired about the
chauffeur, and learned that only yesterday, M. Renauld had declared
that he was not likely to use the car, and that Masters might just
as well take a holiday.

A perplexed frown was beginning to gather between Poirot's eyes.

"What is it?" I whispered.

He shook his head impatiently, and asked a question:

"Pardon, M. Bex, but without doubt M. Renauld could drive the
car himself?"

The commissary looked over at Françoise, and the old woman replied
promptly:

"No, Monsieur did not drive himself."

Poirot's frown deepened.

"I wish you would tell me what is worrying you," I said impatiently.

"See you not? In his letter M. Renauld speaks of sending the car
for me to Calais."

"Perhaps he meant a hired car," I suggested.

"Doubtless that is so. But why hire a car when you have one of
your own. Why choose yesterday to send away the chauffeur on
a holiday--suddenly, at a moment's notice? Was it that for some
reason he wanted him out of the way before we arrived?"




4

The Letter Signed "Bella"


Françoise had left the room. The magistrate was drumming
thoughtfully on the table.

"M. Bex," he said at length, "here we have directly conflicting
testimony. Which are we to believe, Françoise or Denise?"

"Denise," said the commissary decidedly. "It was she who let the
visitor in. Françoise is old and obstinate, and has evidently
taken a dislike to Madame Daubreuil.  Besides, our own knowledge
tends to show that Renauld was entangled with another woman."

"_Tiens!_" cried M. Hautet. "We have forgotten to inform M. Poirot
of that." He searched amongst the papers on the table, and finally
handed the one he was in search of to my friend. "This letter,
M. Poirot, we found in the pocket of the dead man's overcoat."

Poirot took it and unfolded it. It was somewhat worn and crumbled,
and was written in English in a rather unformed hand:

"_My dearest one:_

"Why have you not written for so long? You do love me still, don't
you? Your letters lately have been so different, cold and strange,
and now this long silence. It makes me afraid. If you were to stop
loving me! But that's impossible--what a silly kid I am--always
imagining things! But if you _did_ stop loving me, I don't know
what I should do--kill myself perhaps! I couldn't live without you.
Sometimes I fancy another woman is coming between us. Let her look
out, that's all--and you too!  I'd as soon kill you as let her have
you! I mean it.

"But there, I'm writing high-flown nonsense.  You love me, and I
love you--yes, love you, love you, love you!

"Your own adoring

"BELLA."

There was no address or date. Poirot handed it back with a grave
face.

"And the assumption is, M. le juge--?"

The examining magistrate shrugged his shoulders.

"Obviously M. Renauld was entangled with this Englishwoman--Bella. He
comes over here, meets Madame Daubreuil, and starts an intrigue with
her. He cools off to the other, and she instantly suspects something.
This letter contains a distinct threat. M. Poirot, at first sight the
case seemed simplicity itself. Jealousy!  The fact that M. Renauld
was stabbed in the back seemed to point distinctly to its being a
woman's crime."

Poirot nodded.

"The stab in the back, yes--but not the grave! That was laborious
work, hard work--no woman dug that grave, monsieur. That was a
man's doing."

The commissary exclaimed excitedly: "Yes, yes, you are right. We
did not think of that."

"As I said," continued M. Hautet, "at first sight the case seemed
simple, but the masked men, and the letter you received from
M. Renauld complicate matters.  Here we seem to have an entirely
different set of circumstances, with no relationship between the
two. As regards the letter written to yourself, do you think it
is possible that it referred in any way to this 'Bella,' and her
threats?"

Poirot shook his head.

"Hardly. A man like M. Renauld, who has led an adventurous life in
out-of-the-way places, would not be likely to ask for protection
against a woman."

The examining magistrate nodded his head emphatically.

"My view exactly. Then we must look for the explanation of the
letter--"

"In Santiago," finished the commissary. "I shall cable without delay
to the police in that city, requesting full details of the murdered
man's life out there, his love affairs, his business transactions,
his friendships, and any enmities he may have incurred. It will
be strange if, after that, we do not hold a clue to his mysterious
murder."

The commissary looked round for approval.

"Excellent," said Poirot appreciatively.

"His wife, too, may be able to give us a pointer," added the
magistrate.

"You have found no other letters from this Bella amongst M. Renauld's
effects?" asked Poirot.

"No. Of course one of our first proceedings was to search through
his private papers in the study. We found nothing of interest,
however. All seemed square and above-board. The only thing at all
out of the ordinary was his will. Here it is."

Poirot ran through the document.

"So. A legacy of a thousand pounds to Mr. Stonor--who is he,
by the way?"

"M. Renauld's secretary. He remained in England, but was over here
once or twice for a week-end."

"And everything else left unconditionally to his beloved wife,
Eloise. Simply drawn up, but perfectly legal. Witnessed by the two
servants, Denise and Françoise.  Nothing so very unusual about
that." He handed it back.

"Perhaps," began Bex, "you did not notice--"

"The date?" twinkled Poirot. "But yes, I noticed it.  A fortnight
ago. Possibly it marks his first intimation of danger. Many rich
men die intestate through never considering the likelihood of their
demise. But it is dangerous to draw conclusions prematurely. It
points, however, to his having a real liking and fondness for his
wife, in spite of his amorous intrigues."

"Yes," said M. Hautet doubtfully. "But it is possibly a little
unfair on his son, since it leaves him entirely dependent on his
mother. If she were to marry again, and her second husband obtained
an ascendancy over her, this boy might never touch a penny of his
father's money."

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"Man is a vain animal. M. Renauld figured to himself, without doubt,
that his widow would never marry again. As to the son, it may have
been a wise precaution to leave the money in his mother's hands.
The sons of rich men are proverbially wild."

"It may be as you say. Now, M. Poirot, you would without doubt
like to visit the scene of the crime. I am sorry that the body has
been removed, but of course photographs have been taken from every
conceivable angle, and will be at your disposal as soon as they
are available."

"I thank you, monsieur, for all your courtesy."

The commissary rose.

"Come with me, monsieurs."

He opened the door, and bowed ceremoniously to Poirot to precede
him. Poirot, with equal politeness, drew back and bowed to the
commissary.

"Monsieur."

"Monsieur."

At last they got out into the hall.

"That room there, it is the study, _hein_?" asked Poirot suddenly,
nodding towards the door opposite.

"Yes. You would like to see it?" He threw the door open as he spoke,
and we entered.

The room which M. Renauld had chosen for his own particular
use was small, but furnished with great taste and comfort. A
businesslike writing desk, with many pigeon holes, stood in the
window. Two large leather-covered armchairs faced the fireplace,
and between them was a round table covered with the latest books
and magazines. Bookshelves lined two of the walls, and at the end
of the room opposite the window there was a handsome oak sideboard
with a tantalus on top. The curtains and _portière_ were of a soft
dull green, and the carpet matched them in tone.

Poirot stood a moment talking in the room, then he stepped forward,
passed his hand lightly over the backs of the leather chairs, picked
up a magazine from the table, and drew a finger gingerly over the
surface of the oak sideboard. His face expressed complete approval.

"No dust?" I asked, with a smile.

He beamed on me, appreciative of my knowledge of his peculiarities.

"Not a particle, _mon ami_! And for once, perhaps, it is a pity."

His sharp, birdlike eyes darted here and there.

"Ah!" he remarked suddenly, with an intonation of relief. "The
hearth-rug is crooked," and he bent down to straighten it.

Suddenly he uttered an exclamation and rose. In his hand he held
a small fragment of paper.

"In France, as in England," he remarked, "the domestics omit to
sweep under the mats!"

Bex took the fragment from him, and I came closer to examine it.

"You recognize it--eh, Hastings?"

I shook my head, puzzled--and yet that particular shade of pink
paper was very familiar.

The commissary's mental processes were quicker than mine.

"A fragment of a cheque," he exclaimed.

The piece of paper was roughly about two inches square. On it was
written in ink the word "Duveen."

"_Bien_," said Bex. "This cheque was payable to, or drawn by,
one named Duveen."

"The former, I fancy," said Poirot, "for, if I am not mistaken,
the handwriting is that of M. Renauld."

That was soon established, by comparing it with a memorandum from
the desk.

"Dear me," murmured the commissary, with a crestfallen air,
"I really cannot imagine how I came to overlook this."

Poirot laughed.

"The moral of that is, always look under the mats!  My friend
Hastings here will tell you that anything in the least crooked is a
torment to me. As soon as I saw that the hearth-rug was out of the
straight, I said to myself: '_Tiens!_ The leg of the chair caught
it in being pushed back. Possibly there may be something beneath
it which the good Françoise overlooked.'"

"Françoise?"

"Or Denise, or Léonie. Whoever did this room. Since there is no
dust, the room _must_ have been done this morning. I reconstruct
the incident like this. Yesterday, possibly last night, M. Renauld
drew a cheque to the order of some one named Duveen. Afterwards it
was torn up, and scattered on the floor. This morning--" But M. Bex
was already pulling impatiently at the bell.

Françoise answered it. Yes, there had been a lot of pieces of
paper on the floor. What had she done with them? Put them in the
kitchen stove of course! What else?

With a gesture of despair, Bex dismissed her. Then, his face
lightening, he ran to the desk. In a minute he was hunting through
the dead man's cheque book. Then he repeated his former gesture. The
last counterfoil was blank.

"Courage!" cried Poirot, clapping him on the back.  "Without doubt,
Madame Renauld will be able to tell us all about this mysterious
person named Duveen."

The commissary's face cleared. "That is true. Let us proceed."

As we turned to leave the room, Poirot remarked casually: "It was
here that M. Renauld received his guest last night, eh?"

"It was--but how did you know?"

"By _this_. I found it on the back of the leather chair."

And he held up between his finger and thumb a long black hair--a
woman's hair!

M. Bex took us out by the back of the house to where there was a
small shed leaning against the house. He produced a key from his
pocket and unlocked it.

"The body is here. We moved it from the scene of the crime just
before you arrived, as the photographers had done with it."

He opened the door and we passed in. The murdered man lay on the
ground, with a sheet over him. M. Bex dexterously whipped off the
covering. Renauld was a man of medium height, slender and lithe in
figure. He looked about fifty years of age, and his dark hair was
plentifully streaked with grey. He was clean shaven with a long
thin nose, and eyes set rather close together, and his skin was
deeply bronzed, as that of a man who had spent most of his life
beneath tropical skies. His lips were drawn back from his teeth
and an expression of absolute amazement and terror was stamped on
the livid features.

"One can see by his face that he was stabbed in the back," remarked
Poirot.

Very gently, he turned the dead man over. There, between the
shoulder-blades, staining the light fawn overcoat, was a round dark
patch. In the middle of it there was a slit in the cloth. Poirot
examined it narrowly.

"Have you any idea with what weapon the crime was committed?"

"It was left in the wound." The commissary reached down a large
glass jar. In it was a small object that looked to me more like
a paper-knife than anything else.  It had a black handle, and
a narrow shining blade. The whole thing was not more than ten
inches long. Poirot tested the discoloured point gingerly with his
finger tip.

"_Ma foi!_ but it is sharp! A nice easy little tool for murder!"

"Unfortunately, we could find no trace of fingerprints on it,"
remarked Bex regretfully. "The murderer must have worn gloves."

"Of course he did," said Poirot contemptuously.  "Even in Santiago
they know enough for that. The veriest amateur of an English Mees
knows it--thanks to the publicity the Bertillon system has been
given in the Press. All the same, it interests me very much that
there were no finger-prints. It is so amazingly simple to leave the
finger-prints of some one else! And then the police are happy." He
shook his head. "I very much fear our criminal is not a man of
method--either that or he was pressed for time. But we shall see."

He let the body fall back into its original position.

"He wore only underclothes under his overcoat, I see," he remarked.

"Yes, the examining magistrate thinks that is rather a curious
point."

At this minute there was a tap on the door which Bex had closed after
him. He strode forward and opened it.  Françoise was there. She
endeavoured to peep in with ghoulish curiosity.

"Well, what is it?" demanded Bex impatiently.

"Madame. She sends a message that she is much recovered, and is
quite ready to receive the examining magistrate."

"Good," said M. Bex briskly. "Tell M. Hautet and say that we will
come at once."

Poirot lingered a moment, looking back towards the body. I thought
for a moment that he was going to apostrophize it, to declare
aloud his determination never to rest till he had discovered the
murderer. But when he spoke, it was tamely and awkwardly, and his
comment was ludicrously inappropriate to the solemnity of the moment.

"He wore his overcoat very long," he said constrainedly.




5

Mrs. Renauld's Story


We found M. Hautet awaiting us in the hall, and we all proceeded
upstairs together, Françoise marching ahead to show us the
way. Poirot went up in a zigzag fashion which puzzled me, until he
whispered with a grimace:

"No wonder the servants heard M. Renauld mounting the stairs;
not a board of them but creaks fit to wake the dead!"

At the head of the staircase, a small passage branched off.

"The servants' quarters," explained Bex.

We continued along a corridor, and Françoise tapped on the last
door to the right of it.

A faint voice bade us enter, and we passed into a large sunny
apartment looking out towards the sea, which showed blue and
sparkling about a quarter of a mile distant.

On a couch, propped up with cushions, and attended by Dr. Durand,
lay a tall, striking-looking woman. She was middle-aged, and her
once dark hair was now almost entirely silvered, but the intense
vitality and strength of her personality would have made itself
felt anywhere. You knew at once that you were in the presence of
what the French call "_une maitresse femme_."

She greeted us with a dignified inclination of the head.

"Pray be seated, monsieurs."

We took chairs, and the magistrate's clerk established himself at
a round table.

"I hope, madame," began M. Hautet, "that it will not distress you
unduly to relate to us what occurred last night?"

"Not at all, monsieur. I know the value of time, if these scoundrelly
assassins are to be caught and punished."

"Very well, madame. It will fatigue you less, I think, if I ask you
questions and you confine yourself to answering them. At what time
did you go to bed last night?"

"At half-past nine, monsieur. I was tired."

"And your husband?"

"About an hour later, I fancy."

"Did he seem disturbed--upset in any way?"

"No, not more than usual."

"What happened then?"

"We slept. I was awakened by a hand being pressed over my mouth. I
tried to scream out, but the hand prevented me. There were two men
in the room. They were both masked."

"Can you describe them at all, madame?"

"One was very tall, and had a long black beard, the other was short
and stout. His beard was reddish. They both wore hats pulled down
over their eyes."

"H'm," said the magistrate thoughtfully, "too much beard, I fear."

"You mean they were false?"

"Yes, madame. But continue your story."

"It was the short man who was holding me. He forced a gag into my
mouth, and then bound me with rope hand and foot. The other man
was standing over my husband. He had caught up my little dagger
paper-knife from the dressing-table and was holding it with the
point just over his heart. When the short man had finished with
me, he joined the other, and they forced my husband to get up
and accompany them into the dressing-room next door. I was nearly
fainting with terror, nevertheless I listened desperately.

"They were speaking in too low a tone for me to hear what they
said. But I recognized the language, a bastard Spanish such
as is spoken in some parts of South America.  They seemed to be
demanding something from my husband, and presently they grew angry,
and their voices rose a little. I think the tall man was speaking.
'You know what we want!' he said. '_The secret!_ Where is it?' I do
not know what my husband answered, but the other replied fiercely:
'You lie! We know you have it. Where are your keys?'

"Then I heard sounds of drawers being pulled out.  There is a safe
on the wall of my husband's dressing-room in which he always keeps a
fairly large amount of ready money. Léonie tells me this has been
rifled and the money taken, but evidently what they were looking
for was not there, for presently I heard the tall man, with an oath,
command my husband to dress himself.  Soon after that, I think some
noise in the house must have disturbed them, for they hustled my
husband out into my room only half dressed."

"_Pardon_," interrupted Poirot, "but is there then no other egress
from the dressing-room?"

"No, monsieur, there is only the communicating door into my
room. They hurried my husband through, the short man in front, and
the tall man behind him with the dagger still in his hand. Paul
tried to break away to come to me. I saw his agonized eyes. He
turned to his captors. 'I must speak to her,' he said. Then, coming
to the side of the bed, 'It is all right, Eloise,' he said. 'Do
not be afraid. I shall return before morning.' But, although he
tried to make his voice confident, I could see the terror in his
eyes. Then they hustled him out of the door, the tall man saying:
'One sound--and you are a dead man, remember.'

"After that," continued Mrs. Renauld, "I must have fainted. The
next thing I recollect is Léonie rubbing my wrists, and giving
me brandy."

"Madame Renauld," said the magistrate, "had you any idea what it
was for which the assassins were searching?"

"None whatever, monsieur."

"Had you any knowledge that your husband feared something?"

"Yes. I had seen the change in him."

"How long ago was that?"

Mrs. Renauld reflected.

"Ten days perhaps."

"Not longer?"

"Possibly. I only noticed it then."

"Did you question your husband at all as to the cause?"

"Once. He put me off evasively. Nevertheless, I was convinced that
he was suffering some terrible anxiety.  However, since he evidently
wished to conceal the fact from me, I tried to pretend that I had
noticed nothing."

"Were you aware that he had called in the services of a detective?"

"A detective?" exclaimed Mrs. Renauld, very much surprised.

"Yes, this gentleman--M. Hercule Poirot." Poirot bowed. "He arrived
today in response to a summons from your husband." And taking
the letter written by M. Renauld from his pocket he handed it to
the lady.

She read it with apparently genuine astonishment.

"I had no idea of this. Evidently he was fully cognizant of the
danger."

"Now, madame, I will beg of you to be frank with me. Is there any
incident in your husband's past life in South America which might
throw light on his murder?"

Mrs. Renauld reflected deeply, but at last shook her head.

"I can think of none. Certainly my husband had many enemies, people
he had got the better of in some way or another, but I can think of
no one distinctive case. I do not say there is no such incident--only
that I am not aware of it."

The examining magistrate stroked his beard disconsolately.

"And you can fix the time of this outrage?"

"Yes, I distinctly remember hearing the clock on the mantelpiece
strike two." She nodded towards an eight-day travelling clock in
a leather case which stood in the centre of the chimney-piece.

Poirot rose from his seat, scrutinized the clock carefully, and
nodded, satisfied.

"And here too," exclaimed M. Bex, "is a wrist watch, knocked off
the dressing-table by the assassins, without doubt, and smashed to
atoms. Little did they know it would testify against them."

Gently he picked away the fragments of broken glass.  Suddenly his
face changed to one of utter stupefaction.

"_Mon Dieu!_" he ejaculated.

"What is it?"

"The hands of the watch point to seven o'clock!"

"What?" cried the examining magistrate, astonished.

But Poirot, deft as ever, took the broken trinket from the startled
commissary, and held it to his ear. Then he smiled.

"The glass is broken, yes, but the watch itself is still going."

The explanation of the mystery was greeted with a relieved smile. But
the magistrate bethought him of another point.

"But surely it is not seven o'clock now?"

"No," said Poirot gently, "it is a few minutes after five. Possibly
the watch gains, is that so, madame?"

Mrs. Renauld was frowning perplexedly.

"It does gain," she admitted, "but I've never known it to gain
quite so much as that."

With a gesture of impatience, the magistrate left the matter of
the watch and proceeded with his interrogatory.

"Madame, the front door was found ajar. It seems almost certain
that the murderers entered that way, yet it has not been forced at
all. Can you suggest any explanation?"

"Possibly my husband went out for a stroll the last thing, and
forgot to latch it when he came in."

"Is that a likely thing to happen?"

"Very. My husband was the most absent-minded of men."

There was a slight frown on her brow as she spoke, as though this
trait in the dead man's character had at times vexed her.

"There is one inference I think we might draw," remarked the
commissary suddenly. "Since the men insisted on M. Renauld dressing
himself, it looks as though the place they were taking him to,
the place where 'the secret' was concealed, lay some distance away."

The magistrate nodded.

"Yes, far, and yet not too far, since he spoke of being back by
morning."

"What times does the last train leave the station of
Merlinville?" asked Poirot.

"Eleven-fifty one way, and 12:17 the other, but it is more probable
that they had a motor waiting."

"Of course," agreed Poirot, looking somewhat crestfallen.

"Indeed, that might be one way of tracing them," continued the
magistrate, brightening. "A motor containing two foreigners is quite
likely to have been noticed.  That is an excellent point, M. Bex."

He smiled to himself, and then, becoming grave once more, he said
to Mrs. Renauld:

"There is another question. Do you know any one of the name of
'Duveen'?"

"Duveen?" Mrs. Renauld repeated, thoughtfully.  "No, for the moment,
I cannot say I do."

"You have never heard your husband mention any one of that name?"

"Never."

"Do you know any one whose Christian name is Bella?"

He watched Mrs. Renauld narrowly as he spoke, seeking to surprise
any signs of anger or consciousness, but she merely shook her head
in quite a natural manner.  He continued his questions.

"Are you aware that your husband had a visitor last night?"

Now he saw the red mount slightly in her cheeks, but she replied
composedly.

"No, who was that?"

"A lady."

"Indeed?"

But for the moment the magistrate was content to say no more. It
seemed unlikely that Madame Daubreuil had any connection with
the crime, and he was anxious not to upset Mrs. Renauld more than
necessary.

He made a sign to the commissary, and the latter replied with a
nod. Then rising, he went across the room, and returned with the
glass jar we had seen in the outhouse in his hand. From this,
he took the dagger.

"Madame," he said gently, "do you recognize this?"

She gave a little cry.

"Yes, that is my little dagger." Then--she saw the stained point,
and she drew back, her eyes widening with horror. "Is that--blood?"

"Yes, madame. Your husband was killed with this weapon." He removed
it hastily from sight. "You are quite sure about it's being the
one that was on your dressing-table last night?"

"Oh, yes. It was a present from my son. He was in the Air Force
during the War. He gave his age as older than it was." There was
a touch of the proud mother in her voice. "This was made from
a streamline aeroplane wire, and was given to me by my son as a
souvenir of the War."

"I see, madame. That brings us to another matter.  Your son,
where is he now? It is necessary that he should be telegraphed to
without delay."

"Jack? He is on his way to Buenos Ayres."

"What?"

"Yes. My husband telegraphed to him yesterday. He had sent him on
business to Paris, but yesterday he discovered that it would be
necessary for him to proceed without delay to South America. There
was a boat leaving Cherbourg for Buenos Ayres last night, and he
wired him to catch it."

"Have you any knowledge of what the business in Buenos Ayres was?"

"No, monsieur, I know nothing of its nature, but Buenos Ayres is
not my son's final destination. He was going overland from there
to Santiago."

And, in unison, the magistrate and the commissary exclaimed:

"Santiago! Again Santiago!"

It was at this moment, when we were all stunned by the mention of
that word, that Poirot approached Mrs.  Renauld. He had been standing
by the window like a man lost in a dream, and I doubt if he had fully
taken in what had passed. He paused by the lady's side with a bow.

"_Pardon_, madame, but may I examine your wrists."

Though slightly surprised at the request, Mrs.  Renauld held them
out to him. Round each of them was a cruel red mark where the cords
had bitten into the flesh. As he examined them, I fancied that a
momentary flicker of excitement I had seen in his eyes disappeared.

"They must cause you great pain," he said, and once more he looked
puzzled.

But the magistrate was speaking excitedly.

"Young M. Renauld must be communicated with at once by wireless. It
is vital that we should know anything he can tell us about this
trip to Santiago." He hesitated. "I hoped he might have been near
at hand, so that we could have saved you pain, madame." He paused.

"You mean," she said in a low voice, "the identification of my
husband's body?"

The magistrate bowed his head.

"I am a strong woman, monsieur. I can bear all that is required of
me. I am ready--now."

"Oh, tomorrow will be quite soon enough, I assure you--"

"I prefer to get it over," she said in a low tone, a spasm of pain
crossing her face. "If you will be so good as to give me your arm,
Doctor?"

The doctor hastened forward, a cloak was thrown over Mrs. Renauld's
shoulders, and a slow procession went down the stairs. M. Bex
hurried on ahead to open the door of the shed. In a minute or
two Mrs. Renauld appeared in the doorway. She was very pale,
but resolute.  Behind her, M. Hautet was clacking commiserations
and apologies like an animated hen.

She raised her hand to her face.

"A moment, messieurs, while I steel myself."

She took her hand away and looked down at the dead man. Then the
marvellous self-control which had upheld her so far deserted her.

"Paul!" she cried. "Husband! Oh, God!" And pitching forward she
fell unconscious to the ground.

Instantly Poirot was beside her, he raised the lid of her eye,
felt her pulse. When he had satisfied himself that she had really
fainted, he drew aside. He caught me by the arm.

"I am an imbecile, my friend! If ever there was love and grief in
a woman's voice, I heard it then. My little idea was all wrong. _Eh
bien!_ I must start again!"




6

The Scene of the Crime


Between them, the doctor and M. Hautet carried the unconscious woman
into the house. The commissary looked after them, shaking his head.

"_Pauvre femme_," he murmured to himself. "The shock was too much
for her. Well, well, we can do nothing.  Now, M. Poirot, shall we
visit the place where the crime was committed?"

"If you please, M. Bex."

We passed through the house, and out by the front door. Poirot
had looked up at the staircase in passing, and shook his head in
a dissatisfied manner.

"It is to me incredible that the servants heard nothing.  The
creaking of that staircase, with _three_ people descending it,
would awaken the dead!"

"It was the middle of the night, remember. They were sound asleep
by then."

But Poirot continued to shake his head as though not fully accepting
the explanation. On the sweep of the drive, he paused, looking up
at the house.

"What moved them in the first place to try if the front door were
open? It was a most unlikely thing that it should be. It was far
more probable that they should at once try to force a window."

"But all the windows on the ground floor are barred with iron
shutters," objected the commissary.

Poirot pointed to a window on the first floor.

"That is the window of the bedroom we have just come from, is it
not? And see--there is a tree by which it would be the easiest
thing in the world to mount."

"Possibly," admitted the other. "But they could not have done so
without leaving footprints in the flower-bed."

I saw the justice of his words. There were two large oval flower-beds
planted with scarlet geraniums, one each side of the steps leading
up to the front door. The tree in question had its roots actually
at the back of the bed itself, and it would have been impossible
to reach it without stepping on the bed.

"You see," continued the commissary, "owing to the dry weather no
prints would show on the drive or paths; but, on the soft mould of
the flower-bed, it would have been a very different affair."

Poirot went close to the bed and studied it attentively.  As Bex had
said, the mould was perfectly smooth. There was not an indentation
on it anywhere.

Poirot nodded, as though convinced, and we turned away, but he
suddenly darted off and began examining the other flower-bed.

"M. Bex!" he called. "See here. Here are plenty of traces for you."

The commissary joined him--and smiled.

"My dear M. Poirot, those are without doubt the footprints of the
gardener's large hobnailed boots. In any case, it would have no
importance, since this side we have no tree, and consequently no
means of gaining access to the upper story."

"True," said Poirot, evidently crestfallen. "So you think these
footprints are of no importance?"

"Not the least in the world."

Then, to my utter astonishment, Poirot pronounced these words:

"I do not agree with you. I have a little idea that these footprints
are the most important things we have seen yet."

M. Bex said nothing, merely shrugged his shoulders.  He was far
too courteous to utter his real opinion.

"Shall we proceed?" he asked instead.

"Certainly. I can investigate this matter of the footprints later,"
said Poirot cheerfully.

Instead of following the drive down to the gate, M. Bex turned up a
path that branched off at right angles. It led, up a slight incline,
round to the right of the house, and was bordered on either side
by a kind of shrubbery. Suddenly it emerged into a little clearing
from which one obtained a view of the sea. A seat had been placed
here, and not far from it was a rather ramshackle shed. A few
steps further on, a neat line of small bushes marked the boundary
of the Villa grounds. M.  Bex pushed his way through these and we
found ourselves on a wide stretch of open downs. I looked round,
and saw something that filled me with astonishment.

"Why, this is a golf course," I cried.

Bex nodded.

"The limits are not completed yet," he explained. "It is hoped to
be able to open them sometime next month.  It was some of the men
working on them who discovered the body early this morning."

I gave a gasp. A little to my left, where for the moment I had
overlooked it, was a long narrow pit, and by it, face downwards,
was the body of a man! For a moment, my heart gave a terrible leap,
and I had a wild fancy that the tragedy had been duplicated. But
the commissary dispelled my illusion by moving forward with a sharp
exclamation of annoyance:

"What have my police been about? They had strict orders to allow
no one near the place without proper credentials!"

The man on the ground turned his head over his shoulder.

"But I have proper credentials," he remarked, and rose slowly to
his feet.

"My dear M. Giraud," cried the commissary. "I had no idea that you
had arrived, even. The examining magistrate has been awaiting you
with the utmost impatience."

As he spoke, I was scanning the new-comer with the keenest
curiosity. The famous detective from the Paris Sûreté was familiar
to me by name, and I was extremely interested to see him in the
flesh. He was very tall, perhaps about thirty years of age, with
auburn hair and moustache, and a military carriage. There was a
trace of arrogance in his manner which showed that he was fully
alive to his own importance. Bex introduced us, presenting Poirot
as a colleague. A flicker of interest came into the detective's eye.

"I know you by name, M. Poirot," he said. "You cut quite a figure
in the old days, didn't you? But methods are very different now."

"Crimes, though, are very much the same," remarked Poirot gently.

I saw at once that Giraud was prepared to be hostile.  He resented
the other being associated with him, and I felt that if he came
across any clue of importance he would be more than likely to keep
it to himself.

"The examining magistrate--" began Bex again. But Giraud interrupted
him rudely:

"A fig for the examining magistrate! The light is the important
thing. For all practical purposes it will be gone in another
half-hour or so. I know all about the case, and the people at the
house will do very well until tomorrow, but, if we're going to find
a clue to the murderers, here is the spot we shall find it. Is it
your police who have been trampling all over the place? I thought
they knew better nowadays."

"Assuredly they do. The marks you complain of were made by the
workmen who discovered the body."

The other grunted disgustedly.

"I can see the tracks where the three of them came through the
hedge--but they were cunning. You can just recognize the centre
footmarks as those of M.  Renauld, but those on either side have
been carefully obliterated. Not that there would really be much to
see anyway on this hard ground, but they weren't taking any chances."

"The external sign," said Poirot. "That is what you seek, eh?"

The other detective stared.

"Of course."

A very faint smile came to Poirot's lips. He seemed about to speak,
but checked himself. He bent down to where a spade was lying.

"That's what the grave was dug with, right enough," said Giraud. "But
you'll get nothing from it. It was Renauld's own spade, and the
man who used it wore gloves. Here they are." He gesticulated with
his foot to where two soiled earth-stained gloves were lying. "And
they're Renauld's too--or at least his gardener's. I tell you,
the men who planned out this crime were taking no chances. The man
was stabbed with his own dagger, and would have been buried with
his own spade. They counted on leaving no traces! But I'll beat
them. There's always _something_! And I mean to find it."

But Poirot was now apparently interested in something else, a short
discoloured piece of lead-piping which lay beside the spade. He
touched it delicately with his finger.

"And does this, too, belong to the murdered man?"  he asked, and
I thought I detected a subtle flavour of irony in the question.

Giraud shrugged his shoulders to indicate that he neither knew
nor cared.

"May have been lying around here for weeks. Anyway, it doesn't
interest me."

"I, on the contrary, find it very interesting," said Poirot sweetly.

I guessed that he was merely bent on annoying the Paris detective
and, if so, he succeeded. The other turned away rudely, remarking
that he had no time to waste, and bending down he resumed his minute
search of the ground.

Meanwhile Poirot, as though struck by a sudden idea, stepped back
over the boundary, and tried the door of the little shed.

"That's locked," said Giraud over his shoulder. "But it's only a
place where the gardener keeps his rubbish.  The spade didn't come
from there, but from the toolshed up by the house."

"Marvellous," murmured M. Bex, to me ecstatically.  "He has been
here but half an hour, and he already knows everything! What a
man! Undoubtedly Giraud is the greatest detective alive today."

Although I disliked the detective heartily, I nevertheless was
secretly impressed. Efficiency seemed to radiate from the man. I
could not help feeling that, so far, Poirot had not greatly
distinguished himself, and it vexed me. He seemed to be directing
his attention to all sorts of silly, puerile points that had nothing
to do with the case. Indeed, at this juncture, he suddenly asked:

"M. Bex, tell me, I pray you, the meaning of this whitewashed line
that extends all round the grave. Is it a device of the police?"

"No, M. Poirot, it is an affair of the golf course. It shows that
there is here to be a 'bunkair,' as you call it."

"A bunkair?" Poirot turned to me. "That is the irregular hole filled
with sand and a bank at one side, is it not?"

I concurred.

"You do not play the golf, M. Poirot?" inquired Bex.

"I? Never! What a game!" He became excited.  "Figure to yourself,
each hole it is of a different length.  The obstacles, they are
not arranged mathematically.  Even the greens are frequently up
one side! There is only one pleasing thing--the how do you call
them?--tee boxes! They, at least, are symmetrical."

I could not refrain from a laugh at the way the game appeared to
Poirot, and my little friend smiled at me affectionately, bearing
no malice. Then he asked:

"But M. Renauld, without doubt he played the golf?"

"Yes, he was a keen golfer. It's mainly owing to him, and to his
large subscriptions, that this work is being carried forward. He
even had a say in the designing of it."

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

Then he remarked:

"It was not a very good choice they made--of a spot to bury the
body? When the men began to dig up the ground, all would have
been discovered."

"Exactly," cried Giraud triumphantly. "And that _proves_ that they
were strangers to the place. It's an excellent piece of indirect
evidence."

"Yes," said Poirot doubtfully. "No one who knew would bury a body
there--unless--unless--they _wanted_ it to be discovered. And that
is clearly absurd, is it not?"

Giraud did not even trouble to reply.

"Yes," said Poirot, in a somewhat dissatisfied voice.
"Yes--undoubtedly--absurd!"




7

The Mysterious Madame Daubreuil


As we retraced our steps to the house, M. Bex excused himself
for leaving us, explaining that he must immediately acquaint the
examining magistrate with the fact of Giraud's arrival. Giraud
himself had been obviously delighted when Poirot declared that he had
seen all he wanted. The last thing we observed, as we left the spot,
was Giraud, crawling about on all fours, with a thoroughness in his
search that I could not but admire.  Poirot guessed my thoughts,
for as soon as we were alone he remarked ironically:

"At last you have seen the detective you admire--the human
foxhound! Is it not so, my friend?"

"At any rate, he's _doing_ something," I said, with asperity. "If
there's anything to find, he'll find it. Now you--"

"_Eh bien!_ I also have found something! A piece of lead-piping."

"Nonsense, Poirot. You know very well that's got nothing to do with
it. I meant _little_ things--traces that may lead us infallibly to
the murderers."

"_Mon ami_, a clue of two feet long is every bit as valuable as
one measuring two millimetres! But it is the romantic idea that
all important clues must be infinitesimal!  As to the piece of
lead-piping having nothing to do with the crime, you say that
because Giraud told you so.  No"--as I was about to interpose a
question--"we will say no more. Leave Giraud to his search, and me
to my ideas. The case seems straightforward enough--and yet--and
yet, _mon ami_, I am not satisfied! And do you know why? Because of
the wrist watch that is two hours fast. And then there are several
curious little points that do not seem to fit in. For instance,
if the object of the murderers was revenge, why did they not stab
Renauld in his sleep and have done with it?"

"They wanted the 'secret,'" I reminded him.

Poirot brushed a speck of dust from his sleeve with a dissatisfied
air.

"Well, where is this 'secret'? Presumably some distance away,
since they wish him to dress himself. Yet he is found murdered
close at hand, almost within ear-shot of the house. Then again,
it is pure chance that a weapon such as the dagger should be lying
about casually, ready to hand."

He paused frowning, and then went on:

"Why did the servants hear nothing? Were they drugged? Was there
an accomplice and did that accomplice see to it that the front door
should remain open? I wonder if--"

He stopped abruptly. We had reached the drive in front of the
house. Suddenly he turned to me.

"My friend, I am about to surprise you--to please you! I have taken
your reproaches to heart! We will examine some footprints!"

"Where?"

"In that right-hand bed yonder. M. Bex says that they are the
footmarks of the gardener. Let us see if that is so. See, he
approaches with his wheelbarrow."

Indeed an elderly man was just crossing the drive with a barrowful
of seedlings. Poirot called to him, and he set down the barrow and
came hobbling towards us.

"You are going to ask him for one of his boots to compare with
the footmarks?" I asked breathlessly. My faith in Poirot revived
a little. Since he said the footprints in this right-hand bed were
important, presumably they _were_.

"Exactly," said Poirot.

"But won't he think it very odd?"

"He will not think about it at all."

We could say no more, for the old man had joined us.

"You want me for something, monsieur?"

"Yes. You have been gardener here a long time, haven't you?"

"Twenty-four years, monsieur."

"And your name is--?"

"Auguste, monsieur."

"I was admiring these magnificent geraniums. They are truly
superb. They have been planted long?"

"Some time, monsieur. But of course, to keep the beds looking smart,
one must keep bedding out a few new plants, and remove those that
are over, besides keeping the old blooms well picked off."

"You put in some new plants yesterday, didn't you?  Those in the
middle there, and in the other bed also?"

"Monsieur has a sharp eye. It takes always a day or so for them to
'pick up.' Yes, I put ten new plants in each bed last night. As
Monsieur doubtless knows, one should not put in plants when the
sun is hot."

Auguste was charmed with Poirot's interest, and was quite inclined
to be garrulous.

"That is a splendid specimen there," said Poirot, pointing. "Might
I perhaps have a cutting of it?"

"But certainly, monsieur." The old fellow stepped into the bed,
and carefully took a slip from the plant Poirot had admired.

Poirot was profuse in his thanks, and Auguste departed to his barrow.

"You see?" said Poirot with a smile, as he bent over the bed to
examine the indentation of the gardener's hobnailed boot. "It is
quite simple."

"I did not realize--"

"That the foot would be inside the boot? You do not use your
excellent mental capacities sufficiently. Well, what of the
footmark?"

I examined the bed carefully.

"All the footmarks in the bed were made by the same boot," I said
at length after a careful study.

"You think so? _Eh bien_, I agree with you," said Poirot.

He seemed quite uninterested, and as though he were thinking of
something else.

"At any rate," I remarked, "you will have one bee less in your
bonnet now."

"_Mon Dieu!_ But what an idiom! What does it mean?"

"What I meant was that now you will give up your interest in these
footmarks."

But to my surprise Poirot shook his head.

"No, no, _mon ami_. At last I am on the right track. I am still
in the dark, but, as I hinted just now to M. Bex, these footmarks
are the most important and interesting things in the case! That
poor Giraud--I should not be surprised if he took no notice of
them whatever."

At that moment, the front door opened, and M.  Hautet and the
commissary came down the steps.

"Ah, M. Poirot, we were coming to look for you," said the
magistrate. "It is getting late, but I wish to pay a visit to Madame
Daubreuil. Without doubt she will be very much upset by M. Renauld's
death, and we may be fortunate enough to get a clue from her. The
secret that he did not confide to his wife, it is possible that
he may have told it to the woman whose love held him enslaved.
We know where our Samsons are weak, don't we?"

I admired the picturesqueness of M. Hautet's language.  I suspected
that the examining magistrate was by now thoroughly enjoying his
part in the mysterious drama.

"Is M. Giraud not going to accompany us?" asked Poirot.

"M. Giraud has shown clearly that he prefers to conduct the case in
his own way," said M. Hautet dryly.  One could see easily enough
that Giraud's cavalier treatment of the examining magistrate had
not prejudiced the latter in his favour. We said no more, but fell
into line. Poirot walked with the examining magistrate, and the
commissary and I followed a few paces behind.

"There is no doubt that Françoise's story is substantially correct,"
he remarked to me in a confidential tone. "I have been telephoning
headquarters. It seems that three times in the last six weeks--that
is to say since the arrival of M. Renauld at Merlinville--Madame
Daubreuil has paid a large sum in notes into her banking account.
Altogether the sum totals two hundred thousand francs!"

"Dear me," I said, considering, "that must be something like four
thousand pounds!"

"Precisely. Yes, there can be no doubt that he was absolutely
infatuated. But it remains to be seen whether he confided his
secret to her. The examining magistrate is hopeful, but I hardly
share his views."

During this conversation we were walking down the lane towards the
fork in the road where our car had halted earlier in the afternoon,
and in another moment I realized that the Villa Marguerite, the
home of the mysterious Madame Daubreuil, was the small house from
which the beautiful girl had emerged.

"She has lived here for many years," said the commissary, nodding
his head towards the house. "Very quietly, very unobtrusively. She
seems to have no friends or relations other than the acquaintances
she has made in Merlinville. She never refers to the past, nor to
her husband. One does not even know if he is alive or dead. There is
a mystery about her, you comprehend."  I nodded, my interest growing.

"And--the daughter?" I ventured.

"A truly beautiful young girl--modest, devout, all that she should
be. One pities her, for, though she may know nothing of the past,
a man who wants to ask her hand in marriage must necessarily inform
himself, and then--" The commissary shrugged his shoulders cynically.

"But it would not be her fault!" I cried, with rising indignation.

"No. But what will you? A man is particular about his wife's
antecedents."

I was prevented from further argument by our arrival at the
door. M. Hautet rang the bell. A few minutes elapsed, and then we
heard a footfall within, and the door was opened. On the threshold
stood my young goddess of that afternoon. When she saw us, the colour
left her cheeks, leaving her deathly white, and her eyes widened
with apprehension. There was no doubt about it, she was afraid!

"Mademoiselle Daubreuil," said M. Hautet, sweeping off his hat,
"we regret infinitely to disturb you, but the exigencies of the
Law--you comprehend? My compliments to Madame your mother, and will
she have the goodness to grant me a few moments' interview."

For a moment the girl stood motionless. Her left hand was pressed
to her side, as though to still the sudden unconquerable agitation
of her heart. But she mastered herself, and said in a low voice:

"I will go and see. Please come inside."

She entered a room on the left of the hall, and we heard the low
murmur of her voice. And then another voice, much the same in
timbre, but with a slightly harder inflection behind its mellow
roundness said:

"But certainly. Ask them to enter."

In another minute we were face to face with the mysterious Madame
Daubreuil.

She was not nearly so tall as her daughter, and the rounded curves
of her figure had all the grace of full maturity. Her hair, again
unlike her daughter's, was dark, and parted in the middle in
the madonna style.  Her eyes, half hidden by the drooping lids,
were blue.  There was a dimple in the round chin, and the half
parted lips seemed always to hover on the verge of a mysterious
smile. There was something almost exaggeratedly feminine about her,
at once yielding and seductive. Though very well preserved, she was
certainly no longer young, but her charm was of the quality which
is independent of age.

Standing there, in her black dress with the fresh white collar
and cuffs, her hands clasped together, she looked subtly appealing
and helpless.

"You wished to see me, monsieur?" she asked.

"Yes, madame." M. Hautet cleared his throat. "I am investigating
the death of M. Renauld. You have heard of it, no doubt?"

She bowed her head without speaking. Her expression did not change.

"We came to ask you whether you can--er--throw any light upon the
circumstances surrounding it?"

"I?" The surprise of her tone was excellent.

"Yes, madame. It would, perhaps, be better if we could speak to
you alone." He looked meaningly in the direction of the girl.

Madame Daubreuil turned to her.

"Marthe, dear--"

But the girl shook her head.

"No, _maman_, I will not go. I am not a child. I am twenty-two. I
shall not go."

Madame Daubreuil turned back to the examining magistrate.

"You see, monsieur."

"I should prefer not to speak before Mademoiselle Daubreuil."

"As my daughter says, she is not a child."

For a moment the magistrate hesitated, baffled.

"Very well, madame," he said at last. "Have it your own way. We
have reason to believe that you were in the habit of visiting the
dead man at his Villa in the evenings.  Is that so?"

The colour rose in the lady's pale cheeks, but she replied quietly:

"I deny your right to ask me such a question!"

"Madame, we are investigating a murder."

"Well, what of it? I had nothing to do with the murder."

"Madame, we do not say that for a moment. But you knew the dead man
well. Did he ever confide in you as to any danger that threatened
him?"

"Never."

"Did he ever mention his life in Santiago, and any enemies he may
have made there?"

"No."

"Then you can give us no help at all?"

"I fear not. I really do not see why you should come to me. Cannot
his wife tell you what you want to know?" Her voice held a slender
inflection of irony.

"Madame Renauld has told us all she can."

"Ah!" said Madame Daubreuil. "I wonder--"

"You wonder what, madame?"

"Nothing."

The examining magistrate looked at her. He was aware that he was
fighting a duel, and that he had no mean antagonist.

"You persist in your statement that M. Renauld confided nothing
in you?"

"Why should you think it likely that he should confide in me?"

"Because, madame," said M. Hautet, with calculated brutality. "A
man tells to his mistress what he does not always tell to his wife."

"Ah!" she sprang forward. Her eyes flashed fire.  "Monsieur, you
insult me! And before my daughter! I can tell you nothing. Have
the goodness to leave my house!"

The honours undoubtedly rested with the lady. We left the Villa